A Natural Election

~~or~~

How not to spoil the party


Abstract

The main structural barrier to the creation of a viable third party in the United States of America is the prevalence of first-past-the-post elections for the vast majority of public offices. Gerrymandering and barriers to ballot access are secondary consequences of the entrenched duopoly. However, with modern technology, basic game theory, and a commitment to ethical and transparent behavior, a third party could take root and grow naturally, overcoming the significant obstacles in its path. By implementing a de-facto ranked-choice policy, the new party can avoid playing the role of spoiler.


The Art Of The Steal

Public faith in free and fair elections is the bedrock of our democracy. The events of January 6th 2021 (when a riotous mob as deluded as they were disillusioned violently stormed the Captiol) paint a stark and foreboding picture of what lies ahead if that faith cannot be restored. It would be difficult at this point in time to object to the proposition that the politics of the United States has become unworkably partisan and polarized. To a large degree, this appears to be the result of the stranglehold the two entrenched political parties enjoy over the electoral landscape. In particular, the primary system strongly favors candidates who cater to their base, disfavoring moderate, centrist candidates, and therefore disenfranchising moderate, centrist voters.

The obvious remedy for this problem would be the rise of a moderate, centrist party, one that represents the views of voters who don't lean heavily towards one pole or the other on the political spectrum (as defined by the dominant parties). However, the two-party duopoly seems to make this a mathematical impossibility. How could such a centrist party rise to prominence when, in the beginning, their share of the vote would be small? Given our winner-takes-all, first-past-the-post voting system, it would seem that voters would be disinclined to vote for a party that clearly cannot win, concerned that they would just be throwing their vote away, or worse, splitting the ticket, potentially leading to one of the major parties winning with as little as a 35% share of the vote (or less if there were 4 or more parties running).

But wait: We have something at our disposal that the nation's founders never envisioned. We have the internet! We have computers in our pockets! Admittedly, this seems to have been a mixed bag lately. Isn't that the dystopian technology that has run amok, spawning a plethora of fact-challenged (if not fact-free) conspiratorial information silos, amplifying grievances, broadcasting disinformation, radicalizing the impressionable, and encouraging us to be at each other's throats solely because that state of mind leads to more click-through revenue? Yes, i'm talking about that same l'enfant singularité tech. This is a case where fighting fire with fire makes perfect sense. In fact, it may be our only option.

Everybody In the Poll

Another spectacular recent techno-fail is the state of political polling. It's hard to make decisions in a vacuum; without accurate information about what voters are thinking, candidates and their campaigns are flying blind. It's worth noting that this lack of information is concentrated in the middle of the spectrum; hardcore partisans are much more predictable than independents and moderates. It seems plausible that political strategists are inclined to double down on a base strategy rather than court persuadable voters at least in part because information about persuadable voters has become so unreliable.

Here's a crazy thought: Why not form a party where everyone agrees to say what they're thinking?

It’s My Party

This is how it would work: When you register for Party X, you are strongly encouraged to go to the website, sign up, and download the mobile app. You'll get a news feed covering the goings-on of elections you're interested in. Periodically, you'll be asked a few questions, such as what issues matter most to you, the likelihood that you're going to vote, and -- here's the kicker: if your candidate doesn't make the cut, what's your second choice? The (anonymous!) aggregated answers to these questions would be posted prominently on the party website. Making the answer to this last question accurate and publicly known has significant ramifications.

Let's do some math:

David, Robert, and Irene are running for New City Dog Catcher. There are 100 eligible voters, and they're all planning to vote (it's a very engaged community). Irene is a Party-X candidate; she's the new kid on the block.

David has a solid 45 voter base; Robert has 35. Irene has 20. Since Irene is a Party X candidate, we know that her voters split evenly at 10 each for their second choice. 

Under this scenario, Irene decides to stay in the race till the end. She can't win, but she's not a spoiler. The even split of her second choice would simply add 10 votes to each side of Robert and David’s totals if she were to drop out, so she doesn’t. Staying in the race through the election solidifies Irene's reputation as a serious candidate. It helps to legitimize the Party X platform, and depending on the rules and regulations of the district, it may very well increase Party X's ability to get on the ballot in future elections.

Let's run through another scenario: In this case, David has 40, Robert has 45, and Irene has 15. However, Irene's voters' second choices are lopsided: 12 for David, 3 for Robert. In this situation, under the Party X guidelines, Irene must drop out of the race before the election. As expected, twelve of her votes go to David and 3 to Robert, leading David to win 52 to 48. If she had stayed in the race, she would have been a classic spoiler: Robert would have won with a plurality of 45% of the vote, even though a majority of voters would have preferred David over Robert if Irene was not in the mix. The combination of technology and a disciplined, strategic approach to withdrawing from the race under certain conditions should allow a 3rd party the breathing room to enter races, establish a base of support, and over time gain legitimacy in the eyes of potential voters. This approach allows voters to make a statement with their vote, without feeling like they're throwing it away on a candidate who cannot win.


